docs: add aztec optimisations (#14734)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/docs/aztec/writing_efficient_contracts.md

X000  | Calculating sha256
X000  | Constrained encryption of a log of Y fields
X000  | Constrained encryption and tag a log of Y fields

### Optimization: use arithmetic instead of non-arithmetic operations

Because the underlying equation in the proving backend makes use of multiplication and addition, these operations incur less gates than bit-shifting or bit-masking.

For example:

```rust
comptime global TWO_POW_32: Field = 2.pow_32(16);
// ...
{
    #[private]
    fn mul_inefficient(number: Field) -> u128 {
        number as u128 << 16 as u8
    } // 5244 gates

    #[private]
    fn mul_efficient(number: Field) -> u128 {
        (number * TWO_POW_32) as u128
    } // 5184 gates (60 gates less)
}
```

When comparing the flamegraph of the two functions, the inefficient shift example has a section of gates not present in the multiplicaton example. This difference equates to a saving of 60 gates.

In the same vein bitwise `AND`/`OR`, and comparisons `>`/`<` are expensive. Try avoid these in your circuits.
For example, you can use `&` for boolean comparison effectively, and avoid using `<`:

```rust
{
    #[private]
    fn design_comparison() {

> 

Reviewer: I assume there should be code in here

---
title: Writing Efficient Contracts
sidebar_position: 2
tags: [Developers, Contracts]
---

import Image from "@theme/IdealImage";

## Writing functions

On Ethereum L1, all data is public and all execution is completely reproducible. The Aztec L2 takes on the challenge of execution of private functions on private data. This is done client side, along with the generation of corresponding proofs, so that the network can verify the proofs and append any encrypted data/nullifiers (privacy preserving state update).

This highlights a key difference with how public vs private functions are written.

:::info Writing efficiently

- **Public functions** can be written intuitively - optimising for execution/gas as one would for EVM L2s

> - **Private functions** are optimised differently, as they are compiled to a circuit to be proven locally (see [Thinking in Circuits](https://noir-lang.org/docs/explainers/explainer-writing-noir))

Reviewer 2: do we want to also. add how there are DA costs too for private fns though wethat is out of scope rn

:::warning Tradeoffs and caveats
Each optimisation technique has its own tradeoffs and caveats so should be carefully considered with the full details in the linked [section](https://noir-lang.org/docs/explainers/explainer-writing-noir#writing-efficient-noir-for-performant-products).
:::

#### Overhead of nested Private Calls

When private functions are called, the overhead of a "kernel circuit" is added each time, so be mindful of calling/nesting too many private functions. This may influence the design towards larger private functions rather than conventionally atomic functions.

#### Profiling using FlameGraph

Measuring the gate count across a private function can be seen at the end of the counter tutorial [here](../developers/tutorials/codealong/contract_tutorials/counter_contract#investigate-the-increment-function). Full profiling and flamegraph commands explained [here](../developers/guides/smart_contracts/profiling_transactions).

### L2 Data costs

> Of the L2 costs, the public/private data being updated is most significant. Like on Ethereum, if a lot of data is written/updated, then tx/block limits may be reached.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of the L2 costs, the public/private data being updated is most significant. As L2 functions create notes, nullifiers, encrypted logs, all of this get posted into blobs on ethereum and will be quite expensive
```

Reviewer 2: we don't have a data limit on tx/block. Just a gas limit

    }

}

fn sqrt_constrained(number: Field) -> Field {
    let MAX_LEN = 100;

    let mut guess = number;
    let mut guess_squared = guess * guess;
    for _ in 1..MAX_LEN as u32 + 1 {
        // only use square root part of circuit when required, otherwise use alternative part of circuit that does nothing
        // Note: both parts of the circuit exist MAX_LEN times in the circuit, regardless of whether the square root part is used or not
        if (guess_squared != number) {
            guess = (guess + number / guess) / 2;
            guess_squared = guess * guess;
        }
    }

    guess
}

unconstrained fn sqrt_unconstrained(number: Field) -> Field {
    let mut guess = number;
    let mut guess_squared = guess * guess;
    while guess_squared != number {
        guess = (guess + number / guess) / 2;
        guess_squared = guess * guess;
    }
    guess
}

```

The two implementations after the contract differ in one being constrained vs unconstrained, as well as the loop implementation (which has other design considerations).
Measuring the two, we find the `sqrt_inefficient` to require around 1500 extra gates compared to `sqrt_efficient`.

To see each flamegraph:

> - `SERVE=1 aztec flamegraph target/optimisation_example-OptimisationExample.json sqrt_inefficient`

Reviewer 2: probably remove this else we will need to manually maintain this if things change? defer to you?

This highlights a key difference with how public vs private functions are written.

:::info Writing efficiently

- **Public functions** can be written intuitively - optimising for execution/gas as one would for EVM L2s
- **Private functions** are optimised differently, as they are compiled to a circuit to be proven (see [Thinking in Circuits](https://noir-lang.org/docs/explainers/explainer-writing-noir))

:::

## Assessing efficiency

On Aztec (like other L2s) there are several costs/limit to consider...

- L1 costs - execution, blobs, events
- L2 costs - public execution, data, logs
- Local limits - proof generation, execution

### Local Proof generation

Since the proof generation is a significant local burden, being mindful of the gate-count of private functions is important. The gate-count is a proportionate indicator of the memory and time required to prove locally, so should not be ignored.

> If private functions are written contrary to the advice in [this section](https://noir-lang.org/docs/explainers/explainer-writing-noir#writing-efficient-noir-for-performant-products), then a program risks hitting local limits.

Reviewer: If all of the strategies outlined in [this doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wzeBSjwOZ6-QePcnPcst0yhojXg1McvIl7g3B7ilRYw/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.v6lazgm38yzs) are covered in the noir docs page, then i think just linking to it is sufficient. Although I think it would still be valuable to call out the high level strategies here, without going into the low level detail (e.g. constrained vs unconstrained computation, control flow optimizations, avoiding AND, avoiding comparators, etc)

---
title: Writing Efficient Contracts
sidebar_position: 2
tags: [Developers, Contracts]
---

## Writing functions

On Ethereum L1, all data is public and all execution is completely reproducible. The Aztec L2 takes on the challenge of execution of private functions on private data. This is done client side, along with the generation of corresponding proofs, so that the network can verify the proofs and append any encrypted data/nullifiers (privacy preserving state update).

This highlights a key difference with how public vs private functions are written.

:::info Writing efficiently

- **Public functions** can be written intuitively - optimising for execution/gas as one would for EVM L2s
- **Private functions** are optimised differently, as they are compiled to a circuit to be proven (see [Thinking in Circuits](https://noir-lang.org/docs/explainers/explainer-writing-noir))

:::

## Assessing efficiency

On Aztec (like other L2s) there are several costs/limit to consider...

- L1 costs - execution, blobs, events
- L2 costs - public execution, data, logs
- Local limits - proof generation, execution

> ### Local Proof generation

Reviewer: I think it would be nice to include expected gate counts for common operations, like in rahul's doc

e.g.
~75 gates per poseidon2 hash of 3 fields 
3500 for reading on a tree (e.g. nullifier tree, note hash tree or public data tree)
4000 for a shared mutable read
X000 for sha256
X000 to constrained-encrypt a log of Y fields
X000 to constrained-encrypt-and-tag a log of Y fields

Author: See comment [here](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/pull/14734#discussion_r2126521062).

Since proof generation is a significant local burden, being mindful of the gate-count of private functions is important. The gate-count is a proportionate indicator of the memory and time required to prove locally, so should not be ignored.

From [here](https://noir-lang.org/docs/explainers/explainer-writing-noir#writing-efficient-noir-for-performant-products), a summary of details to consider (where possible) to avoid hitting local limits:

> - Use fields and avoid casting between types

Author: It is a worthwhile list of actions to _consider_  for any application, and the details are in the Noir doc. Further caveats can be added there.

> - Use fields and avoid casting between types

Author: Tweaked emphasis.

> - Use fields and avoid casting between types

Reviewer 2: I agree - actually using fields is a bad idea in Aztec setting since they don't have all u254 numbers. so mathematical ops on field is a very bad idea. 
Additionally aztec.nr notes use u128 everywhere. 

So it is confusing to the reader when they see us avoiding fields while this doc mentions use it.
Let's please remove this line.

- Use Arithmetic over non-arithmetic operations
- Use static over dynamic values
- Reduce what is inside loops and conditional logic

> - Leverage unconstrained execution

Author: It is a worthwhile list of actions to _consider_  for any application, and the details are in the Noir doc. Further caveats can be added there.

> - Leverage unconstrained execution

Author: Although I'm now tempted to remove this summary list to ensure devs go to the detailed doc to properly consider the possible actions.

> - Leverage unconstrained execution

Author: Tweaked emphasis.

:::

## Assessing efficiency

On Aztec (like other L2s) there are several costs/limit to consider...

- L1 costs - execution, blobs, events
- L2 costs - public execution, data, logs
- Local limits - proof generation, execution

### Local Proof generation

Since proof generation is a significant local burden, being mindful of the gate-count of private functions is important. The gate-count is a proportionate indicator of the memory and time required to prove locally, so should not be ignored.

#### Noir for circuits

An explanation of efficient use of Noir for circuits should be considered for each subsection under [writing efficient Noir](https://noir-lang.org/docs/explainers/explainer-writing-noir#writing-efficient-noir-for-performant-products) to avoid hitting local limits. The general theme is to use language features that favour the underlying primitives and representation of a circuit from code.

A couple of examples:
- Since the underlying cryptography uses an equation made of additions and multiplications, these are more efficient (wrt gate count) in Noir than say bit-shifting.

> - Unconstrained functions by definition do not constrain their operations/output, so do not contribute to gate count. Using them carefully can bring in some savings, but the results must then be constrained so that proofs are meaningful for your application.

Author: Noir optimisations in the existing Noir documentation shouldn't be duplicated here.

Initially the PR intentionally didn't give a list of Noir optimisations so there were not two references to the same thing. Since adding it is is the source of all PR comments.

With your feedback I'd added a list to give an indication of what is in the doc, but I kept it minimal to encourage people to go to the doc for Noir optimisations. With Oleh and Rahul's interpretation of on-liners being comprehensive instructions, I reduced the list to just two optimisations with a little broader explanation, and a warning box to refer people to the detailed Noir doc.

If there are Noir specific details missing from the Noir doc, we can add them there. If there are deeper aztec-specific numerical details/commands etc, these can be in the tutorial or how-to suggested in chat.

> - Unconstrained functions by definition do not constrain their operations/output, so do not contribute to gate count. Using them carefully can bring in some savings, but the results must then be constrained so that proofs are meaningful for your application.

Author: As per sync, moving to build section of docs and adding specific commands for flamegraph, and bake-in specific code examples in the doc.

In a follow-up task can have the Noir-specific examples as code snippets from Noir code in the Noir doc.

- **Private functions** are optimised differently, as they are compiled to a circuit to be proven (see [Thinking in Circuits](https://noir-lang.org/docs/explainers/explainer-writing-noir))

:::

## Assessing efficiency

On Aztec (like other L2s) there are several costs/limit to consider...

- L1 costs - execution, blobs, events
- L2 costs - public execution, data, logs
- Local limits - proof generation, execution

### Local Proof generation

Since proof generation is a significant local burden, being mindful of the gate-count of private functions is important. The gate-count is a proportionate indicator of the memory and time required to prove locally, so should not be ignored.

#### Noir for circuits

An explanation of more optimised use of Noir for circuits should be considered for each subsection under [writing efficient Noir](https://noir-lang.org/docs/explainers/explainer-writing-noir#writing-efficient-noir-for-performant-products) to avoid hitting local limits. To give an idea of actions (not to be applied blindly) the items below are a summary of the things to consider *where possible/practical*:
- Use fields and avoid casting between types

> - Use Arithmetic over non-arithmetic operations

Author: Each item is expanded upon in it's relevant section of the Noir docs, and not having two docs explaining a Noir-specific detail in both places.
With this and Oleh's comment, I think it'll make more sense to remove this teaser list, so people don't think that one line here is enough to go by.

> - Use Arithmetic over non-arithmetic operations

Author: Removed list in favour of fuller Noir explanation, expanded this one a little here as an example.

- Use static over dynamic values
- Reduce what is inside loops and conditional logic

> - Leverage unconstrained execution

Reviewer 2: link unconstrained
